What's next?

We're now coming to the end of our course in concurrent programming in Erlang. What's next?


3.16

Other features of Erlang  

Here we’ll consider some other features of Erlang that we’ve not covered in detail.

The four things we’re going to look at are:

- Macros
- Records
- Maps
- Binaries
We only cover these briefly, with quick examples, but if you want to find out more it’s
all in the online documentation. You could use the comments on this step to discuss 
how these four features might be useful for your Erlang programming.


3.17

The Erlang tool ecosystem  
In this step, Simon gives a lightning overview of some of the tools that are used by Erlang developers.

Some of the tools come “in the box” as part of the Erlang distribution, while others are available separately, 
usually as open source distributions. Simon also mentions two texts which cover OTP in more detail, 
as well as looking at some editors for Erlang programs.


3.18 - QUIZ


3.19

Francesco, Joe and Simon: Erlang/OTP now and in the future  
In this video, Francesco, Joe and Simon discuss Erlang and OTP as they are used currently, and how they might evolve in the future.

The discussion begins with Francesco explaining that OTP is at the heart of nearly all real-world Erlang applications, 
because of the amount of work that it does for programmers “out of the box”. The discussion moves into how systems scale, 
and the role of OTP in helping (or perhaps not helping) this to be done. They conclude by looking at how the Erlang ecosystem 
might develop over the coming five to ten years.


3.20 - TEST


3.21

Coming to the end  

In this final video Simon wraps up the course, and summarises it in four key messages

- functional at the core
- share-nothing processes
- let it fail!
- scale it up
and summarises the elegant and effective design decisions underlying the language.

He points the way for other things to do, including

- further reading in a selection of books and websites,
- other systems to look at, such as elixir and akka
- other projects to follow, calling on the twittersphere for some suggestions.

We will also provide more specific feedback, based on your questions and contributions across 
this week’s comments, and addressing any common questions or themes that emerge during the week or across the course as a whole. 
The video is here. -> https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wBm5OXSJksw

We do hope you’ve enjoyed the course, and will continue to explore Erlang and OTP. Happy programming!

Post-course survey
We’d like to ask you some questions about your experience on the course, to help us keep improving. 
We hope that you’ll also find it useful to reflect on your experience on the course. Please complete the post-course survey.

The survey should take around 10 minutes to complete. We really appreciate all your feedback.